In 1969 in July,
three Americans launched into space.
Now, they went to the surface of the moon,
they famously made
the great leap for mankind.
Buzz Aldrin, Neil Armstrong,
they walked on the surface,
they planted this flag.
It's rightly celebrated as a moment
that in America we say is a triumph.
We think it was this
amazing accomplishment.
They didn't just leave behind
this flag, though.
They also left behind a plaque.
This plaque is a beautiful object,
and one that I want to talk to you
a little bit about.
First, you might notice
that there's two globes,
representing all of earth.
And then there's this beautiful statement:
"We came in peace for all mankind."
Now, at first, this is just
nice poetic language,
but it's also set in a typeface
that's perfect for this moment.
It seems industrial, it seems engineered.
It also is the best possible name
you could come up with
for something on the moon: Futura.
Now, I want to talk to you about fonts,
and why this typeface is perfect
for this moment.
But it's actually more
than just ceremonial.
Now, when all of you arrived here today,
you actually had to think about fonts.
You might not realize it,
but you're all unconscious
experts on typography.
Typography is the study
of how fonts inhabit our world,
they're the visual language
of the words we use.
Here's the thing
that's funny about this, though.
I know you're probably not like me,
you're not a font nerd,
maybe some of you are,
but if you're not, that's alright,
because I might spend hours every day
trying to pick the perfect typeface
for the perfect project,
or I might spend thousands
of dollars every year,
trying to get ones
with the right features.
But all of you actually spend hours
every day, evaluating fonts.
If you don't believe me,
think about how you got here.
Each of you had to judge by the signs
and maybe even on your phone,
which signals to trust
and which to ignore.
You were evaluating fonts.
Or maybe when you're just
buying a new product,
you have to think about
whether something is expensive
or cheap or hard to get or easy to find.
And the funny thing about it is,
this may not seem extraordinary to you,
but the moment you see
something out of place,
you recognize it right away.
(Laughter)
The thing I love about typography,
and why I love fonts
and why I love Futura,
is that, for me,
what I study is everywhere.
Every street that I walk down,
every book that I pick up,
every thing that I read
is filled with the thing I love.
Now, once you understand the history
and what happens with typography,
you actually have a history
of everything before you.
And this is the typeface Futura.
As previously we've discussed,
this is modernism in miniature.
This is a way in which modernism
infiltrated this country
and became perhaps the most popular,
or promiscuous typeface,
of the twentieth century.
"Less is more," right, these are
the aphorisms of modernism.
And in the visual arts,
the same thing happened.
Let's focus on the essentials,
focus on the basic shapes,
focus on geometry.
So Futura actually holds this to its core.
You might notice that the shapes
inherent in Futura
have circles, squares, triangles.
Some of the shapes
are all based on circles,
like the O, D and C,
or others have this pointed
apex of the triangle.
Others just look like
they might have been made
with a ruler or a compass.
They feel geometric,
they feel mathematic, precise.
In fact, this whole system
carries through with the way
that the typeface was designed.
To not look like it was made
like other typefaces, to be something new.
Here it is in the lightweight,
the medium weight and the bold weight.
The whole family has
different things to commend to it.
This was a conscious break from the past,
something that looked like it was made
by a machine, and not by hand.
When I say not made by hand,
this is what I mean.
This is what we think about maybe,
when you might create something
with a calligraphic brush or a pen.
That there's thicks and thins.
And even more traditional typefaces,
say like a Garamond,
holds vestiges of this old system
in which you can see the A
where it get little bit thinner at the top
and thicker down below,
because it's trying to look like
someone had made it by hand.
But Futura, in contrast,
is designed to look like
no one had touched it at all,
that this was made by a machine,
for a machine age, for an industrial age.
There's actually a sleight of hand here
that Paul Renner, the designer
who made this in 1927, employed.
If you look at the way in which
the circular shape
joins with the vertical shaft,
you'll notice that it tapers
just every so slightly.
And this is one of hundreds of ways
in which this typeface was designed
to look geometrically perfect,
even though it's mathematically not.
And this is what typeface
designers do all the time
to make typefaces work, every day.
Now, there were other designers doing this
at the same time in Europe and America.
These are a few other
excellent examples from Europe,
trying to create something new
for the new age, a new moment in time.
These are some other ones in Germany
that in some ways
look very similar to Futura,
maybe with higher waist or lower waist
or different proportions.
Then why did Futura take over the world?
In this case, if you can read
the titles there,
some of these names
don't quite roll off the tongue:
Erbar, Kabel Light,
Berthold-Grotesk, Elegant-Grotesk.
These aren't exactly
household names, are they?
And so when you compare that to Futura,
you realize that this was a really
good choice by the marketing team.
What's amazing about this name --
you know, what's in this name
is that this is a name
that actually invokes hope
and an idea about the future.
And this isn't actually the word
for future in German,
it wasn't a German name,
they actually picked something
that would speak to a wider,
larger audience, a universal audience.
And when you compare it
to what was being done in America --
these are the typefaces
from the same period
in the United States in the 1920s,
bold, brash, braggadocios.
You almost think of this as exactly
like what the stock market looked like
when they were all
going nuts in the 1920s.
And you realize that Futura
is doing something revolutionary.
I want to step back and talk
about an example of the typeface in use.
So this is a magazine that we all
probably know today, "Vanity Fair."
This is what it looked like
in 1929, in the summer.
And in many ways, there's
nothing wrong with this design.
This is absolutely typical of the 1920s.
There's a photograph
of an important person,
in this case Franklin Roosevelt,
then-governor of New York.
Everything seems centered,
everything seems symmetrical.
There's still a little bit
of ornamentation,
so this is still maybe having
some vestiges of the painted lady
and not fully modernistic.
But everything seems kid of solid.
There's even drop caps
to help you get into the text.
But this all changed very quickly
and in October of 1929,
a Berlin-based designer came
and redesigned "Vanity Fair."
And this is what
it looks like with Futura.
Instead of the governor
now we have a photograph
of an abstract, beautiful setting,
in this case, the ocean.
Instead of drop caps,
there's nothing at all.
And replaced with a centered
layout is now asymmetry.
And it gets even more radical
the further you enter the magazine.
In this case,
even more dramatic asymmetry.
In this case, illustrations
by Pablo Picasso, moving across the page
and breaking the gutter of the two pages.
And there's something even more radical.
If you look closely at the Futura,
you might notice something.
You might not pick it up at first,
but there are no capital letters
in the title or the captions on this page.
You might not think that's very radical,
but pick up any magazine,
any book or go to any website,
and I guarantee, you are not
going to find it very easily.
This is still a radical idea.
And why is that radical?
When we think about
what capital letters denote,
they denote something important,
whether it's our names, or our titles.
Or maybe even just
the name of our corporations,
or maybe our trademarks.
Actually, in some ways,
America's the home of capitalization.
We love putting capitals in everything.
(Laughter)
But think about how radical this would be
to introduce a magazine where you're
taking away all the capital letters.
This has maybe had
the same political force
that we now argue over things
like pronouns in our society today.
In the 1920s,
this is just shortly after Soviet Russia
had a communist revolution.
And for them, this actually represented
a socialist infiltration into America.
All lowercase letters meant
that this was an egalitarian,
complete lowering of everything
into one equal playing field.
Now this is still kind of a radical idea.
Think about how often
you do capitalize something
to have more power or prestige to it.
So for them to do this was a way
in which Futura was using this idea.
Now, other designers
were doing other things with Futura.
Others brought other ideas
of modernism with it,
whether it was interesting
new illustration styles,
or interesting new collage
types of illustration.
Or even just new book covers,
whether they were from Europe.
But here's the funny thing.
In the 1920s, if you wanted
to use a new typeface,
you couldn't just go download it
onto your computer.
You actually had to have pieces of lead.
So for Americans who wanted to adopt this
and make it part of their own system,
something they could use
in everyday typography,
whether in ads or anything else,
they actually had to have metal type.
So being good American
capitalists, what did we do?
We made all sorts of copies.
Ones that had nothing to do
with the name Futura,
but looked identical to it,
whether it was Spartan or Tempo.
And in fact, by the time
that World War II started,
American corporations were actually trying
to boycott Nazi goods.
But they said,
"Go ahead and use our copies.
Use 20th Century, use Spartan,
use Vogue, use Tempo.
These are identical to Futura."
And in fact, for most people,
they didn't even learn the new names,
they just still called it all Futura.
So America took this typeface in,
conquered it and made it its own.
So by the time World War II finishes,
Americans are using this on everything,
whether it be catalogs, or atlases,
or encyclopedias or charts and graphs,
or calendars, or even political material.
And even the logo for a new
expansion football team.
And in fact, it was used even on some
of the most important advertising
of the 20th century.
So it's in this context
that when the US government
was picking a typeface
to use after World War II
for new maps and new projects,
they picked Futura.
It wasn't an astounding choice,
it wasn't a radical choice,
it didn't have anything
to do with communism.
But in this case, it was used
on some of the most important maps,
so this one, an air force map in 1962,
or used for the maps in Vietnam in '66.
And so it wasn't a surprise
that when astronauts
first started the Mercury program,
such as John Glenn orbiting the earth,
that charts and maps
that he was using were in Futura.
And in fact, by the time
Mercury morphed into Apollo,
it started getting used
more and more for more things.
So in this case for a safety plan,
or even starting to get used
on instrument panels,
or navigational aids.
Or even on diagrams
to show how the whole system worked.
But here's the amazing thing,
it didn't just get used for papers
that they handed out to people.
It started to get used for an interface,
for an entire system
that helped the astronauts
know how to use the machine.
NASA wasn't just one big corporation
making everything.
There was hundreds of contractors --
Boeing, IBM, McDonnell Douglas --
all making different machines.
Now imagine if astronauts had to use
different typefaces and different systems
for each component they had
in the space shuttles.
This would have been
impossible to navigate
and there would have been
a cognitive overload
every time they had
to open up a new system.
So in this case, Futura
being used on the interface
helped them navigate complexity
and make it more clear.
And it wasn't just used on buttons,
it was used on labels,
and it was used on their food rations,
and it was used on their tool kits.
It was used on knobs and levers
to tell them what to do.
In fact, maybe even some of the places
where they needed to have things
that were complex be more simple to them,
instructions were printed
entirely in Futura,
so that they could know
what to do with that one moment.
They didn't have to remember
everything in their head,
they could have it out there
in the world to see and refer to.
In this case, Futura helped
make that system,
which was already
a very difficult and complex system,
a little less complex.
In fact, the very first or last thing
an astronaut might have seen
when they were entering
or exiting the spacecraft
would have been in Futura.
One of my favorite examples
of how Futura worked in this way
is actually this camera.
This is a Hasselblad
that was made by the Swedish company.
It's a perfectly good camera,
some of you might have used one,
it's prized by photographers
as a really great camera.
And you might notice,
if you know anything about cameras,
that there's some
modifications made to it.
In this case, there are stickers
placed all over the film canisters,
or other parts of the camera here.
What this enabled NASA to do,
was make something really great
out of the astronauts.
They're not photographers,
they're not experts in art.
But they could ensure that they
would know how to use this camera
because of the labels
placed there in Futura.
So in this case,
Futura acquired and made sure
that they had legitimacy
with the things they were using.
In this case to not take off the film
before it would expose.
Which, in this case,
we would have never had
some of the amazing photos we had
without this label.
When we see something as decorative
as this, a ceremonial patch,
or something like this plaque on the moon,
we realize that Futura was more
than just something ceremonial,
something more than something
that had just been picked for its design.
In fact, Futura had authority,
had legitimacy and had power
because of this choice.
There's one other thing
I want to talk about in closing.
And that is that Futura tells a story.
And this is what I love about typefaces,
is that all of them tell stories.
And in this case, this typeface
tells a very powerful story
about assimilation, about something
being taken into America
and being made part of its culture.
And that's one of the best
and worst things America does,
is we take things into our culture
and we spit them out back again
and claim them our own.
And in this case, Futura mirrors
exactly what happened with the technology
undergirding the whole system.
Futura was a German typeface,
taken in, made into an American commodity.
And so were the technologies:
the rockets, the scientists
all came from Germany as well.
So in some ways, this German typeface
on an American plaque
perfectly mirrors what happened
with the technology.
And in this case,
when you think about this story,
you realize that typography on the moon
represents legitimacy,
represents authority,
and this gave them, the astronauts,
the power to get to the moon.
Thank you.
(Applause)